---
title: 'The adaptive LIF (adLIF) neuron (WIP)'
date: 2025-06-28
permalink: /posts/2025/06/ad-lif/
tags:
  - adLIF
  - Tutorial
  - SNN
  - JAX
---

WIP, come back later

A model based on the adaptive LIF (adLIF) neuron achieved 95.8% accuracy on Spiking Heidelberg Digits (SHD) in 2024. Not bad, but what is it and how does it work? Let's get some insight from the dudes who did it: Baronig et al. ([link to paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.07517)).

## How it works
At its core, the adLIF is just a LIF with an additional term. You could call it a generalization. Let's look at the discrete definition of its membrane voltage $$\textcolor{green}{\hat{u}[t]}$$ and then figure out that additional term.

$$
\begin{equation}
\textcolor{green}{\hat{u}[t]} = \textcolor{blue}{\alpha} \textcolor{ForestGreen}{u[t-1]} + (1-\textcolor{blue}{\alpha})(-\textcolor{red}{w[t-1]} + \textcolor{purple}{I[t]}) \\
\label{eq:u_hat}
\end{equation}
$$

where $$\textcolor{ForestGreen}{u[t-1]}$$ is the neuron's membrane potential at step t-1. $$\textcolor{blue}{\alpha}$$ is the membrane potential decay rate (TODO crossreference the version from eshraghian and figure out why he doesnt have (1-alpha)). The additional term $$\textcolor{red}{w[t-1]}$$ makes the neuron resonate and adapt, which I'll explain soon. Finally, $$\textcolor{purple}{I[t]}$$ is the input current at step t.

Note that we distinguish between $$\textcolor{green}{\hat{u}[t]}$$ and $$\textcolor{ForestGreen}{u[t]}$$. The first one, $$\textcolor{green}{\hat{u}[t]}$$, is the pre-activation. We use it to check if the membrane potential passes the threshold and potentially reset the membrane potential. $$\textcolor{ForestGreen}{u[t]}$$ is the actual state that we carry to the next timestep. You can check this for yourself in the original implementation [here](https://github.com/IGITUGraz/SE-adlif/blob/main/models/alif.py). The reset equation is shown below.

$$
\begin{equation}
\textcolor{ForestGreen}{u[t]} = \textcolor{green}{\hat{u}[t]} (1 - \textcolor{orange}{S[t]}) + \textcolor{brown}{u_{rest}}\textcolor{orange}{S[t]}
\label{eq:u_reset}
\end{equation}
$$

where $$\textcolor{brown}{u_{rest}}$$ is the resting potential and $$\textcolor{orange}{S[t]}$$ is the spike output at time t (1 if spike, 0 otherwise). Okay now for the main part. What is this additional term $$\textcolor{red}{w[t-1]}$$? Formally, it is defined as

$$
\begin{equation}
\textcolor{red}{w[t]} = \textcolor{blue}{\beta} \textcolor{red}{w[t-1]} + (1-\textcolor{blue}{\beta})(\textcolor{olive}{a}\textcolor{ForestGreen}{u[t]} + \textcolor{magenta}{b}\textcolor{orange}{S[t]})
\label{eq:w}
\end{equation}
$$

Seeing those terms doesn't give you much insight, so we will analyze them in more detail next. Just for completeness though: $$\textcolor{blue}{\beta}$$ is another decay term, this time for the adaptive component. $$\textcolor{olive}{a}$$ and $$\textcolor{magenta}{b}$$ are constants that control the sub-threshold and spike-triggered adaptation, respectively.

## Resonance

Let's start with the resonance part of the equation and assume that $$\textcolor{blue}{\beta} = 0.98$$ and thus $$1 - \textcolor{blue}{\beta} = 0.02$$. We will also ignore the spike-triggered adaptation for now by setting $$\textcolor{magenta}{b} = 0$$ and set $$\textcolor{olive}{a} = 20$$. In this case, the equation simplifies to

$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
\textcolor{red}{w[t]} &= \textcolor{blue}{0.98} \textcolor{red}{w[t-1]} + \textcolor{blue}{0.02}(\textcolor{olive}{20}\textcolor{ForestGreen}{u[t]})\\
&= \textcolor{blue}{0.98} \textcolor{red}{w[t-1]} + \textcolor{olive}{0.4}\textcolor{ForestGreen}{u[t]}
\end{split}
\label{eq:w_simple}
\end{equation}
$$

Okay this looks much more manageable. Remember, this $$\textcolor{red}{w[t-1]}$$ term gets subtracted from the membrane potential. The term changes in proportion to some scaled version of the membrane potential and represents a sort of scaled and delayed version of it. Subtracting this distorted potential from the current potential can cause oscillating behavior. Check out the plot below and adjust the starting value $$\textcolor{ForestGreen}{u[0]}$$ to see how it affects future values.

<div style="display: flex; flex-direction: row; align-items: center; justify-content: center; width: 100%;">
    <div style="display: flex; flex-direction: column; align-items: center; width: 10%;">
        <label for="u0_slider" style="margin-bottom: 10px; color: #2ca02c; font-weight: bold;">u[0]</label>
        <input type="range" min="0" max="1" value="0.5" step="0.05" id="u0_slider" style="writing-mode: vertical-lr; direction: rtl; box-shadow:none;">
    </div>
    <div id="plot" style="width: 90%; height: 400px;"></div>
</div>

<script src="https://cdn.plot.ly/plotly-2.20.0.min.js"></script>
<script src="{{ '/assets/js/adlif.js' | relative_url }}"></script>
<script src="{{ '/assets/js/interactive-plot.js' | relative_url }}"></script>
<script src="{{ '/assets/js/adlif-plot.js' | relative_url }}"></script>

Well well, there really was some oscillation under handpicked values, but surely this doesn't happen under all configurations, right? In the plot below you can adjust the $$\textcolor{blue}{\beta}$$ and $$\textcolor{olive}{a}$$ variables. I encourage you to adjust their values and see what happens.

<div id="plot2-container" style="width: 100%; margin-top: 20px;">
    <div id="plot2" style="width: 100%; height: 400px;"></div>
    <div style="display: flex; flex-direction: row; justify-content: space-around; margin-top: 10px;">
        <div style="width: 45%;">
            <label for="beta_slider" style="font-weight: bold; color: blue;">&beta;</label>
            <input type="range" min="0.8" max="1.0" value="0.96" step="0.005" id="beta_slider" style="width: 100%; box-shadow:none;">
            <p>Value: <span id="beta_value">0.96</span></p>
        </div>
        <div style="width: 45%;">
            <label for="a_slider" style="font-weight: bold; color: olive;">a</label>
            <input type="range" min="0" max="80" value="55" step="1" id="a_slider" style="width: 100%; box-shadow:none;">
            <p>Value: <span id="a_value">55</span></p>
        </div>
    </div>
</div>

<script src="{{ '/assets/js/adlif-plot2.js' | relative_url }}"></script>

What you might have discovered is that setting $$\textcolor{olive}{a} = 0$$ or $$\textcolor{blue}{\beta} = 1$$ makes the adLIF neuron behave just like a LIF, at least for the case where $$\textcolor{magenta}{b} = 0$$. Before we get to $$\textcolor{magenta}{b}$$, there is one more important thing to consider.

## Resonance and the spike response

Unlike their LIF counterparts, AdLIF neurons don't care so much about spikes arriving within a short time interval. Rather, they need their spikes to come at the right phase of the oscillation. 

In the plot below there's a little bar at the top with an incoming spike. You can click and drag around in that bar to shift the spike timing. Why not try it out and see how it affects the membrane potential?

<div id="spike-input-container" style="width: 100%; margin-top: 20px;">
    <div style="margin-bottom: 10px; display: flex; justify-content: space-between; align-items: center;">
        <label style="font-weight: bold;">Click or drag to move the input spike:</label>
    </div>
    <div id="spike-input-area" style="height: 40px; border: 1px solid #ccc; position: relative; background-color: #f9f9f9; cursor: pointer; margin: 0 50px;"></div>
</div>

<div id="plot3" style="width: 100%; height: 400px; margin-top:10px"></div>

<script src="{{ '/assets/js/adlif-plot3.js' | relative_url }}"></script>

What you may have observed is that putting the spike in the first valley at about $$t = 35$$ flattens the potential. On the other hand, moving it to the peak at $$t = 69$$ increases it. This indicates that AdLIF neurons respond well to spikes that line up with their peaks and less so to those that line up with their valleys. 

Not all neurons oscillate at the same frequency. We saw earlier in plot 2 that adjusting $$\textcolor{olive}{a}$$ and $$\textcolor{blue}{\beta}$$ shifts the neurons frequency and thereby what spike timings it responds to.

TODO plot contrasting positive alignment and negative alignment

## Threshold adapation
WIP

## Why it works
WIP

This was the SE adLif. Other implementations may use euler-forward version, which is very similar but TODO as shown in the paper ([still the same paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.07517)).